Docs / debugging (#4578)
canonical/cloud-init: doc/rtd/howto/run_cloud_init_locally.rst

.. _run_cloud_init_locally:

How to run ``cloud-init`` locally
*********************************

It's very likely that you will want to test ``cloud-init`` locally before
deploying it to the cloud. Fortunately, there are several different virtual
machine (VM) and container tools that are ideal for this sort of local
testing.

> 

Author: agreed, done!

QEMU
====
Qemu is a general purpose computer hardware emulator that is capable of
running virtual machines with hardware acceleration while emulating the host's

> instruction set on native architectures (via kvm), as well as emulating

Author: KVM is just a Linux kernel module, not its own project, so I don't know that that really makes sense. Will add the QEMU link though.

metadata, or network configuration directly to an instance without running a
network service. This is helpful for launching local cloud images with QEMU.

Create your configuration
-------------------------
We will leave the network-config and meta-data files empty, but populate
user-data with a cloud-init configuration. You may edit the network and
meta-data files if you have a config to provide.

.. code-block:: shell-session

    $ touch network-config
    $ touch meta-data
    $ cat >user-data <<EOF
    #cloud-config
    password: password
    chpasswd:
      expire: False
    ssh_pwauth: True
    EOF

Create an iso disk
------------------
This disk is used to pass configuration to cloud-init. Create it with the
:command:`genisoimage` command:

.. code-block:: shell-session

    genisoimage \
        -output seed.img \
        -volid cidata -rational-rock -joliet \
        user-data meta-data network-config

Download a cloud image
----------------------
Download a Ubuntu image to run:

.. code-block:: shell-session

    wget https://cloud-images.ubuntu.com/jammy/current/jammy-server-cloudimg-amd64.img

Boot the image with the iso attached
------------------------------------

> Pass the :file:`seed.img` with QEMU:

Author: thanks, fixed!

configuration in the empty files network-config and meta-data.

.. note::

    See the :ref:`network_config_v2` page for details on the format and config
    of network configuration. To learn more about the possible values for
    metadata, check out the :ref:`datasource_nocloud` page.

LXD
===

`LXD`_ offers a streamlined user experience for using Linux system containers.
With LXD.

The following command initialises a container with user data:

.. code-block:: shell-session

    $ lxc init ubuntu-daily:bionic test-container
    $ lxc config set test-container user.user-data - < userdata.yaml
    $ lxc start test-container

To avoid the extra commands this can also be done at launch:

.. code-block:: shell-session

    $ lxc launch ubuntu-daily:jammy test-container --config=user.user-data="$(cat userdata.yaml)"

Finally, a profile can be set up with the specific data if you need to
launch this multiple times:

.. code-block:: shell-session

    $ lxc profile create dev-user-data
    $ lxc profile set dev-user-data user.user-data - < cloud-init-config.yaml
    $ lxc launch ubuntu-daily:bionic test-container -p default -p dev-user-data

> 

Author: Agreed, done!

.. _run_cloud_init_locally:

How to run ``cloud-init`` locally
*********************************

It's very likely that you will want to test ``cloud-init`` locally before
deploying it to the cloud. Fortunately, there are several different virtual
machine (VM) and container tools that are ideal for this sort of local
testing.

* :ref:`boot cloud-init with QEMU <run_with_qemu>`
* :ref:`boot cloud-init with LXD <run_with_lxd>`
* :ref:`boot cloud-init with Libvirt <run_with_libvirt>`
* :ref:`boot cloud-init with Multipass <run_with_multipass>`

.. _run_with_qemu:

QEMU
====

`QEMU`_ is a general purpose computer hardware emulator that is capable of

> running virtual machines with hardware acceleration as well as emulating the
> instruction sets of different architectures than the host's that are different
> from the host that you are running on.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
running virtual machines with hardware acceleration as well as emulating the
instruction sets of different architectures than those of the host you are running on.
```

The ``NoCloud`` datasource allows users to provide their own user data,
metadata, or network configuration directly to an instance without running a
network service. This is helpful for launching local cloud images with QEMU.

Create your configuration
-------------------------

We will leave the :file:`network-config` and :file:`meta-data` files empty, but
populate :file:`user-data` with a cloud-init configuration. You may edit the
:file:`network-config` and :file:`meta-data` files if you have a config to
provide.

.. code-block:: shell-session

    $ touch network-config
    $ touch meta-data
    $ cat >user-data <<EOF
    #cloud-config
    password: password
    chpasswd:
      expire: False
    ssh_pwauth: True
    EOF

Create an iso disk
------------------

This disk is used to pass configuration to cloud-init. Create it with the
:command:`genisoimage` command:

.. code-block:: shell-session

    genisoimage \
        -output seed.img \
        -volid cidata -rational-rock -joliet \
        user-data meta-data network-config

Download a cloud image
----------------------

> Download a Ubuntu image to run:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Download an Ubuntu image to run:
```

.. code-block:: shell-session

    wget https://cloud-images.ubuntu.com/jammy/current/jammy-server-cloudimg-amd64.img

> Boot the image with the iso attached

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Boot the image with the ISO attached
```

------------------------------------

> Boot the cloud image witth our configuration, :file:`seed.img`, to QEMU:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Boot the cloud image with our configuration, :file:`seed.img`, to QEMU:
```

.. code-block:: shell-session

    $ qemu-system-x86_64 -m 1024 -net nic -net user \
        -hda jammy-server-cloudimg-amd64.img \
        -hdb seed.img

The now-booted image will allow for login using the password provided above.

For additional configuration, users can provide much more detailed

> configuration in the empty files network-config and meta-data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
configuration in the empty files :file:`network-config` and :file:`meta-data`.
```

.. note::

    See the :ref:`network_config_v2` page for details on the format and config
    of network configuration. To learn more about the possible values for
    metadata, check out the :ref:`datasource_nocloud` page.

.. _run_with_lxd:

LXD
===

`LXD`_ offers a streamlined user experience for using Linux system containers.

> With LXD.
> 
> The following command initialises a container with user data:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With LXD, the following command initialises a container with user data:
```

Finally, a profile can be set up with the specific data if you need to
launch this multiple times:

.. code-block:: shell-session

    $ lxc profile create dev-user-data
    $ lxc profile set dev-user-data user.user-data - < cloud-init-config.yaml
    $ lxc launch ubuntu-daily:jammy test-container -p default -p dev-user-data

LXD configuration types
-----------------------

The above examples all show how to pass user data. To pass other types of
configuration data use the configuration options specified below:

+----------------+---------------------------+
| Data           | Configuration option      |
+================+===========================+
| user data      | cloud-init.user-data      |
+----------------+---------------------------+
| vendor data    | cloud-init.vendor-data    |
+----------------+---------------------------+
| network config | cloud-init.network-config |
+----------------+---------------------------+

See the LXD `Instance Configuration`_ docs for more info about configuration
values or the LXD `Custom Network Configuration`_ document for more about
custom network config.

.. _run_with_libvirt:

Libvirt
=======

> `Libvirt`_ is tool for managing virtual machines and containers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`Libvirt`_ is a tool for managing virtual machines and containers.
```
